# The java.util.function Package
The interfaces in java.util.function fall into four categories: (1) consumers, (2) suppliers, (3) predicates, and (4) functions. Consumers take a generic argument and
return nothing. Suppliers take no arguments and return a value. Predicates take an argument and return a boolean. Functions take a single argument and return a value.

#### Consumers
- The java.util.function.Consumer interface has as its single, abstract method, void ``accept(T t)``.
- The default ``default void forEach(Consumer<? super T> action)`` method in ``java.util.Iterable`` takes such a Consumer as argument.
- Also the ``Stream.forEach`` and ``Stream.forEachOrdered`` are such functions.

```java
strings.forEach(new Consumer<String>() {
  @Override
  public void accept(String s) {
    System.out.println(s);
  }
});

strings.forEach(s -> System.out.println(s));
strings.forEach(System.out::println);
```

#### Suppliers
- The java.util.function.Supplier interface is particularly simple. It does not have
any static or default methods. It contains only a single, abstract method, ``T get()``.
- Implementing Supplier means providing a method that takes no arguments and returns the generic type.
- One simple example of a Supplier is the ``Math.random`` method, which takes no arguments and returns a double.
- One of the primary use cases for Suppliers is to support the concept of *deferred execution*.
  - For example the orElseGet method takes a Supplier as an argument. The advantage is that the get method on the Supplier will only be invoked when the Optional is empty, so the complete name string is not formed unless it is necessary. (see example)
  - ``CompletableFuture.supplyAsync(Supplier<U> supplier)`` returns a Completable Future that is asynchronously completed by a task running with the value obtained by calling the given Supplier.


```java
randomSupplier = () -> Math.random();
randomSupplier = Math::random;

logger.info(randomSupplier);

/*OR*/
Optional<String> first = names.stream()
  .filter(name -> name.startsWith("C"))
  .findFirst();
System.out.println(first.orElse("None"));
```

#### Predicates
- The single abstract method in Predicate is ``boolean test(T t)``, which takes a single generic argument and returns true or false.
- Predicates are used primarily to filter streams. Given a stream of items, the filter method in ``java.util.stream.Stream`` takes a Predicate and returns a new stream that includes only the items that satisfy the given predicate.
- Other known predicates are `Collection.removeIf(Predicate<? super E> filter)`, `Stream.allMatch(Predicate<? super T> predicate)`

```java
public String getNamesOfLength(int length, String... names) {
  return Arrays.stream(names)
  .filter(s -> s.length() == length)
  .collect(Collectors.joining(", "));
}
```

#### Functions
- The functional interface ``java.util.function.Function`` contains the single abstract method apply, which is invoked to transform a generic input parameter of type T into a generic output value of type R.
- The most common usage of Function is as an argument to the ``Stream.map`` method.

```java
nameLengths = names.stream()
  .map(s -> s.length())
  .collect(Collectors.toList());

nameLengths = names.stream()
  .map(String::length)
  .collect(Collectors.toList());
```
