# Optionals (Java 8)

#### Intro
- Optional is NOT to remove NullPointerExceptions from your code, that’s not its real purpose.
- **Purpose: communicate to the user when a returned value may legitimately be null.**
  - E.g.: When streams return null (i.e. filtering)
- **Value: An instance of Optional can be in one of two states: a reference to an instance of type T, or empty.**
- Immuatbility
  - Instances of Optional are immutable, but the objects they wrap may not be. If you create an Optional that contains an instance of a mutable object, you can still modify the instance.
  - What you can’t do is modify the Optional instance itself, because there are no methods available to do so.

  ```java
  AtomicInteger counter = new AtomicInteger();
  Optional<AtomicInteger> opt = Optional.ofNullable(counter);
  optional.get().incrementAndGet();
  ```

#### Creating Optional From existing value
- Use ``Optional.of``, ``Optional.ofNullable``, or ``Optional.empty``.
  - Prefer using the ``ofNullable`` instead of checking it manually.

```java
/* Shitty version*/
public static <T> Optional<T> createOptionalTheHardWay(T value) {
  return value == null ? Optional.empty() : Optional.of(value);
}

/*Elegant*/
public static <T> Optional<T> createOptionalTheEasyWay(T value) {
  return Optional.ofNullable(value);
}
```

#### Retrieving values from Optional
- Use the ``get`` method, but only if you’re sure a value exists inside the Optional. Otherwise use one of the variations of ``orElse``. You can also use ``ifPresent`` if you only want to execute a Consumer when a value is present.
  - Note: If the Optional is empty, however, then the ``get`` method throws a ``NoSuchElementException``.
  - Prefer using `orElse` as this includes checking for null.

  ```java
  /* Shitty version*/
  System.out.println(
  first.isPresent() ? first.get() : "No even length strings");

  /*Elegant*/
  System.out.println(firstOdd.orElse("No odd length strings"));
  ```

- Variations of ``orElse??
  - ``orElse(T other)`` returns the value if present, otherwise it returns the default value, other
  - ``orElseGet(Supplier<? extends T> other)`` returns the value if present, otherwise it invokes the Supplier and returns the result
  - ``orElseThrow(Supplier<? extends X> exceptionSupplier)`` returns the value if present, otherwise throws the exception created by the Supplier
 - The difference between ``orElse`` and ``orElseGet`` is that the former returns a string that is always created, whether the value exists in the Optional or not, while the latter uses a Supplier, which is only executed if the Optional is empty.

```java
Optional<ComplexObject> val = values.stream.findFirst()
val.orElse(new ComplexObject());
val.orElseGet(() -> new ComplexObject())
```

- `ifPresent` method allows you to provide a Consumer that is only executed
when the Optional contains a value.

```java
first.ifPresent(val -> System.out.println("Found an even-length string"));
```

#### Optional class members - Getters & Setters
- Wrap the result of getter methods in Optionals, but do not do the same for setters, and especially not for attributes.

```java
public class Department {
  private Manager boss;
  public Optional<Manager> getBoss() {
    return Optional.ofNullable(boss);
  }
  public void setBoss(Manager boss) {
    this.boss = boss;
  }
}
```

### Optional flatMap Versus map
- You can also flat list of optionals.

```java
System.out.println("Company Dept Manager: " + co.getDepartment().map(Department::getBoss));
 // Prints Company Dept Manager: Optional[Optional[Manager{name='Mr. Slate'}]]

 System.out.println(co.getDepartment().flatMap(Department::getBoss).map(Manager::getName));
```
